now as it happens the implementation
used in our book is actually none of
these we use a very similar approach to
three called hot 3b here now when we
leave one empty spot at the front okay
so the idea behind this is it just makes
the computation of the parents and the
children a little nicer and use a little
extra space so rather than the parent
function looking like this K minus 1
divided by 2 in this approach if you
leave an empty space not parent is just
K over 2 that's literally why we do it
yeah seem a little silly so the authors
of the textbook chose to do but yeah you
know let's make the math nicer I'm not
gonna complain so in this case our route
is now in position 1 the children are in
2 and 3 and so forth so if we think
about parent 6 divide away - and it's 3
7 divided by 2
well have 3.5 rounded ooh down that's 3
also ok good seems to work and left and
right child will be similar and so in
next week's lap you'll actually
implement one of these and you should
use this approach in order to understand
the textbook approach man just kind of a
nice trick ok it's kind of like a
sentinel node but in this case it makes
them actually it is just like a central
node it makes the code nicer it cost you
just a little bit of space ok our
message okay so let's now summarize what
we know what we have here is all of the
different implementations that we knew
about before we could have imagined
here's any one heap so if we compare it
to the others we could see that has
great performance but unlike the bushy
binary search tree items that have the
same priority are hard to handle no
priority
what ok well this brings us to an
important question why is this thing
called a priority queue well we could
think of its position in the tree as its
priority the thing that's at the root is
the highest priority item it's the thing
that is going to come out of the
priority queue as soon as possible so if
we think about this sock it's got a
bunch of stuff in it well nothing right
now but I might throw a bunch of stuff
in it there's something with the highest
priority it's gonna come out of there as
soon as possible so it's like a queue
where some people are more important
than others so this is not a very
egalitarian data structure so if you
have multiple items of the same priority
let's say you're monitoring the text
messages you're citizenry and two people
write to two people right equally
seditious posts things
we don't approve of that our bushy
binary search tree approach will get
confused however a heap very naturally
handles items with the same priority for
example an array of all aims now the now
I'll note actually that these approaches
here these runtimes are actually I'll
log in at least cheese add this log in
here is amortized because sometimes
we'll have resizes so if we added a
bunch of stuff
there'll be the occasional heap
operation where we need to resize our
backing array and that's no big deal
the binary search tree as it happens can
have a constant get smallest you can
modify this if you keep a pointer to the
smallest so you can modify it if you'd
like but you'd only get much out of it
I'll mention also that array based heaps
they take a lot less memory only about a
third of the memory as if we tried to
represent our heap with approach 1a but
you could do any of these like any of
these approaches here will work but this
is the one that we've chosen to use
because it uses less memory it's faster
and ultimately has this really simple
code okay and just as a follow on these
heaps here of course they handle
priorities naturally as I said out loud
but I guess I'll highlight this bullet
point same deal this is just saying the
heat needs to have all bit it can have
all eights and that's fine so just a
couple last implementation questions
before we move on
how does a priority queue know how to
determine which item is actually
literature like in Java so we look at
the code here what can we eat what would
we need to change here let's imagine
that we wanted to have some default
comparison what we could do is actually
go in here and say we don't just take
any item but we'll only take items which
extend comparable item basically set
here at type bound and so that right
there will now make it so the bin we
could only use our priority queue with
comparable items and there'll be a
default behavior as we did earlier and
you could do that or not but as we did
earlier we also showed how we could have
different orderings and we could do that
by having a constructor in our priority
queue implementations so for example
heap min V Q where the constructor
actually takes a comparator of items in
that case it will use the comparator to
decide whether to add get smallest or
move smallest so that's it for with the
core of the priority queue from there
you'll implement it on your homework and
I think this is a really nice data
structure
with a really slick implementation I
love heaps they're really cool but
they're just not quite as versatile as
binary search trees and so and nor our
binary sorry nor our priority queues as
versatile as maps and so they don't
quite get that level of Fame but they're
still very cool and can be very useful
indeed